---
layout: post
title: Thinner and lighter
date: 2012-11-01 21:34:38.000000000 -05:00
---
[drop_caps]T[/drop_caps]here is a new trend in tech. Going thinner and lighter, and incredibly so. Almost every product line is aspiring to converge towards this goal. There is also no denying who is leading the charge here. That fruit company.

iOS devices have always aspired to be as thin and light as possible with the technology at hand. However, this trend is now showing up in Apple's OSX powered devices as well. With the release of the Retina MacBook Pro, Apple unveiled a portable computer unprecedented in its capabilities and aesthetics. Many "compromises" were made to achieve, what has been called, a few millimeters of thinness. The biggest uproar was about the repairability and post-manufacturing upgradability of the device. Lo and behold, a few months later Apple has followed suit with a new line of iMacs.

The new iMacs are incredible, and literally so. There is no parallel to the design. The aesthetics are stunning, the compromises are astounding. The device is barely upgradable and ditches the optical drive. It features laptop hardware and skids past the much powerful desktop guts. Much effort went into enabling the display's thinness which, again, stands against durability. The iMac is not supposed to be handled or, even, touched. Still, it lost 6lbs. It's always plugged in and hence, does not need to conserve much energy. Still, it sips on power. Then why go so thin? Why not let the iMac be the bulky desktop that sits in a corner and does all your bidding with the force of a thousand processors? It's safe to assume that the iMac invalidates all those obvious arguments that support the efforts and justify the compromises made towards minimizing the footprint of every portable apple device. There is something else under the hood. Something else that is driving Apple to making these devices so minimal. But what?

Lets digress a little. In the recent years, Apple has been accused of looking past its "artsy" audience and into the deep pockets of "regular" consumers. The release of Final Cut Pro X is just one of the occurrences that are being read as the signs of Apple skidding away from artists and professionals. I'm certain, this new iMac and the duke-nukem-forever Mac Pro lineup will be added to the list. However, more artists, more creators are using Apple devices now than they ever were. Almost every aspiring journalist or songwriter or guitarist or painter or coder or designer or student has or desires to buy something Apple. Pure marketing? Well MS is pouring 1.2 billion into marketing Surface and Windows 8. I don't see much happening of it. Then what gives? Why are more artists attracted to this company that is allegedly distancing itself from the entire clan of artisans?

Let's think these two things together: the mystery of the disappearing bulk from Apple's devices and the contradiction of this company distancing itself from the artists who are increasingly drawn to it. What does a thinner and lighter iMac does that previous generations failed to accomplish? Well to begin with, it's much thinner. But how does that matter from a practical standpoint? Isn't that a disadvantage from the aspects of upgradability? The thing is, the creative mind is not practical. Were it so, it'd never think of things as crazy as flying gadgets or time-traveling frizzy-haired Dolorean-driving scientists. Every thing about creativity is impractical. The deviants find inspiration in the most unbelievable of things. Oh wait, that's what the iMac is, *unbelievable*. That's what the iPad mini is, *incredible*. That's what the iPhone 5's lightness is, *incredulous*. And that's what the Retina Display MacBooks are, *unrealistic*. These are things that don't seem possible until they are. There is an increasing number of reviews expressing that there is no way to express these devices in words and that the incredulity can be experienced only by touching them, by lifting them with bare hands, by staring at them in amazement.

Let's tie the knots, shall we? The iMac is disappearing to show the artists what they are making. It's transcending its state of being a "thing". When an artist does become aware of its existence, the realization is of amazement which provokes a desire to touch, to use, and to create. Then the glass-aluminum form disappears again and ideas prevail. The incredible effort that went towards bringing those pixels a millimeter closer to the surface makes ideas expressed in glowing dots seem a lot more real, in fact, surreal. It's crazy that something so thin can be so powerful. It's also crazy that so naive-seeming ideas can change the world. There is a parallel and Apple is putting incredible force in creating it.

There is a reason I double-quoted the word "compromises" in the second paragraph. It's not that they are not real or I have any doubts that they reduce the usability of these devices, atleast for the time being. Absence of an optical drive from the iMac or user-replaceable RAM modules from the Retina MacBooks does affect users, for sure. But how much? Does it weight against the inspiration that these incredible devices are? Is it worth more than the singularity of the sculptor and the chisel that these devices are inching towards? Is it more valuable than an iPad mini being so very portable that it is with you the moment that idea of a lifetime presents itself? And we all know how predictable the nature of ideas is! These are not compromises. They are enablers.

I do not expect tech press to understand this. In my last article I expressed concerns about the divergence between true perception of technology by users and the way it is being presented on blogs. There is a way to explain it now. Most Tech journalists are seldom artists or creators themselves. I have a prejudice that i still have to justify; I believe that those who can't, talk. To expand a little, I look at most tech journalists as the people who can't create technology, science, art and hence, they talk. Failing to realize the almost sacred bond between tools and the artist, these "journalists" objectify technology as the sum of it's parts. They cry over specs, not what the congregation of those specs enables. They review gadgets, not extensions of the creative self. They sell page-views, not the promise of creativity. There is no doubt that the dissonance exists.

Technology is not an aspect of our lives. It is the definition of who we are and what we aspire to become. It is our urge to go beyond what evolution has limited us to. It is us, as our better selves.
