---
layout: post
title: Typos
date: 2014-08-16 20:59:59 -05:00
summary: I have always wondered why I am not so efficeint at reading materials on "the web" relative to my skill level in comprehending print or textbooks. I think I have a very substantiated hypothesis at this point.
---
<p>I have always wondered why I am not so efficeint at reading materials on "the web" relative to my skill level in comprehending print or textbooks (digital or otherwise). I think I have a very substantiated hypothesis at this point: typos<sup id="fnref-786:fn-1"><a href="#fn-786:fn-1" rel="footnote">1</a></sup>. I cannot pretend to be very thorough with things I write, far from it. However, typos have a measurable and disturbing effect on my comprehension while reading a piece of text.</p>

<p>For instance, while reading this</p>

<blockquote>
  <p>You’ve already been stuck with this problem for the last 7 hours! You finally you give up and get back to your desk few hours later (after some sleep or a walk with your dog). Voi a la! You found the problem by doing nothing. Actually your mind found the problem!</p>
</blockquote>

<p><em>You finally you give up...</em> gave me an instant pause and I had to go back and reread the sentence before it. While doing that, I slightly lost the gist of what I was thinking from the last few  paragraphs. While the brain has great discernment when it comes to identifying words spelled wrong, mine gets startled at grammatical mistakes. I immediately loose my train of thought.</p>

<p>This happens all to often, more so now than before. Up until 2010, most of what I read was either textbooks or newspapers (yes!). They are very thoroughly edited and seldom carry glaring errors of this kind. On the other hand, writing on the web is very sporadic and it shows. I love how open the web is and how anyone with something valuable to say (or not!) can do so, without a lot of hassle. However, apparently my brain still expects rigor and freaks out, ever so little, every single time it encounters an anomaly.</p>

<p>I hate it when that happens.</p>

<div class="footnotes">
<hr />
<ol>

<li id="fn-786:fn-1">
<p>Typos, here, mean spelling and grammatical errors.&#160;<a href="#fnref-786:fn-1" rev="footnote">&#8617;</a></p>
</li>

</ol>
</div>
